docs/mailing-lists-and-irc.md, before:

# Mailing Lists, Forums, and Chat

<!-- markdownlint-disable foo -->

There are several ways to connect with the SmartOS and Illumos
communities.

## Mailing Lists & Forums

The best place to talk about SmartOS is the [smartos*discuss mailing
list](https://smartos.topicbox.com/groups/smartos*discuss). If you wish
to send mail to the list you'll need to join, but you can view and
search the archives online without being a member. The discussion list
is the best way to find a broad range of people who may be working on
the same problems or have answered the same questions you have.

There are also other related mailing lists for software included in, or
related to, SmartOS; e.g.,

* [illumos Mailing Lists](https://illumos.org/docs/community/lists/)
* [Triton Data Center](https://smartdatacenter.topicbox.com/groups/sdc*discuss)
  (Compute Service built on SmartOS)
* [Manta Object Storage](https://mantastorage.topicbox.com/groups/manta*discuss)
  (Object Storage built on SmartOS)
* Reddit
    * [r/smartos](https://reddit.com/r/smartos)
    * [r/illumos](https://reddit.com/r/illumos)

## Chat

Real time chat is a great way to connect with other SmartOS users,
and (perhaps) get quick answers to questions when you're in the middle
of something and need advice.

* We can be found in the following channels on `irc.libera.chat`:
    * `#smartos`: The Official SmartOS/Triton Channel
      ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/smartos/))
    * `#manta`: The Official Manta Channel
      ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/manta/))
    * `#illumos`: For discussion of the Illumos project and its
      distributions ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/illumos))
* We also have a [Discord server](https://discord.gg/v4NwA3Hqay).

## Other Resources

Most of the community can also be found on Twitter. Some other Twitter
sources of SmartOS news include:

* [@smartosorg](https://twitter.com/joyentsmartos) SmartOS specific
  twitter account for news and commentary
* [@Triton_DC](https://twitter.com/SmartDataCenter) Triton specific
  twitter account for news and commentary

When tweeting about SmartOS, consider using the
[#smartos Hashtag.](https://twitter.com/#!/search/?q=%23smartos)

Commit message:

Add mastodon to social contacts

docs/mailing-lists-and-irc.md, after:

# Mailing Lists, Forums, and Chat

<!-- markdownlint-disable foo -->

There are several ways to connect with the SmartOS and Illumos
communities.

## Mailing Lists & Forums

The best place to talk about SmartOS is the [smartos*discuss mailing
list](https://smartos.topicbox.com/groups/smartos*discuss). If you wish
to send mail to the list you'll need to join, but you can view and
search the archives online without being a member. The discussion list
is the best way to find a broad range of people who may be working on
the same problems or have answered the same questions you have.

There are also other related mailing lists for software included in, or
related to, SmartOS; e.g.,

* [illumos Mailing Lists](https://illumos.org/docs/community/lists/)
* [Triton Data Center](https://smartdatacenter.topicbox.com/groups/sdc*discuss)
  (Compute Service built on SmartOS)
* [Manta Object Storage](https://mantastorage.topicbox.com/groups/manta*discuss)
  (Object Storage built on SmartOS)
* Reddit
    * [r/smartos](https://reddit.com/r/smartos)
    * [r/illumos](https://reddit.com/r/illumos)

## Chat

Real time chat is a great way to connect with other SmartOS users,
and (perhaps) get quick answers to questions when you're in the middle
of something and need advice.

* We can be found in the following channels on `irc.libera.chat`:
    * `#smartos`: The Official SmartOS/Triton Channel
      ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/smartos/))
    * `#manta`: The Official Manta Channel
      ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/manta/))
    * `#illumos`: For discussion of the Illumos project and its
      distributions ([Channel Logs](https://log.omnios.org/illumos))
* We also have a [Discord server](https://discord.gg/v4NwA3Hqay).

## Other Resources

Most of the community can also be found on social networks.

* [@smartos.org@hostux.social](https://hostux.social/@smartosorg) SmartOS
  specific Mastodon account for news and commentary
* [@triton_dc.org@hostux.social](https://hostux.social/@triton_dc) Triton
  specific Mastodon account for news and commentary
* [@smartosorg](https://twitter.com/joyentsmartos) SmartOS specific
  twitter account for news and commentary
* [@Triton_DC](https://twitter.com/SmartDataCenter) Triton specific
  twitter account for news and commentary

When posting about SmartOS, consider using the `#smartos` Hashtag!
